Robotic Dolphin-Inspired Swimmer

Goal
Build a small mechanical dolphin that floats, stays balanced, and moves forward by wagging a flexible tail with a servo motor.

Materials

Waterproof body shell:
- Plastic bottle, plastic food container, foam block, or 3D-printed shell
- Waterproof tape
- Silicone sealant or hot glue
- Rubber gasket or balloon/plastic bag for inner electronics protection

Electronics:
- Small servo motor
- Battery pack
- Microcontroller such as Arduino Nano, Micro:bit, ESP32, or similar
- Jumper wires
- On/off switch

Tail system:
- Flexible plastic strip, rubber sheet, silicone sheet, or thin craft foam
- Soft plastic or foam for tail flukes
- Small servo horn
- Zip ties, screws, glue, or tape

Balance:
- Foam for flotation
- Small metal washers, coins, fishing weights, or clay for ballast

Testing:
- Bowl, sink, bathtub, or shallow tub of water
- Towel
- Dry work surface

Safety Notes
Keep the first version low voltage and small. Do not use wall power near water. Put the battery and controller inside a sealed inner bag or waterproof compartment. Test the tail movement outside water before putting the swimmer in water.

Step 1: Create the Waterproof Body Shell
Choose a body shape that is long, smooth, and buoyant. A small plastic bottle works well for a first version.

1. Pick a lightweight plastic body.
2. Make the front rounded like a dolphin head.
3. Keep the middle section wide enough to hold electronics.
4. Leave the rear narrow enough for a tail connection.
5. Add foam inside or outside if the body does not float.
6. Make one access opening so electronics can be inserted and removed.

The body does not need to look perfect at first. The important features are floatation, balance, and a dry electronics chamber.

Step 2: Place Electronics and Battery Inside
Place the electronics near the center of the body.

1. Put the battery pack inside first.
2. Place the microcontroller above or beside the battery.
3. Keep wires short and organized.
4. Put electronics inside a small plastic bag, balloon, or sealed pouch.
5. Route the servo wire toward the tail.
6. Add an on/off switch if available.

The battery should sit low in the body so the dolphin naturally stays upright.

Step 3: Build the Flexible Tail Section
The tail should bend side-to-side or up-and-down depending on the design. The simplest version uses a servo that swings the tail left and right.

1. Cut a flexible strip about 8-15 cm long.
2. Attach one end of the strip to the back of the body.
3. Attach the other end to the tail flukes.
4. Make sure the strip bends smoothly.
5. Do not make it too stiff, or the servo may struggle.
6. Do not make it too floppy, or it will not push water well.

A good first tail material is thin plastic from packaging, soft rubber, or craft foam reinforced with tape.

Step 4: Attach the Servo Motor
The servo creates the tail oscillation.

1. Mount the servo near the rear of the body.
2. Keep the servo shaft aligned with the flexible tail.
3. Attach a servo horn to the servo.
4. Connect the servo horn to the tail using tape, wire, or a small linkage.
5. Move the servo by hand gently to check that the tail swings freely.
6. Make sure the servo does not hit the body shell.

For a first model, the servo can stay inside the body with only the moving horn or linkage reaching the tail. This makes waterproofing easier.

Step 5: Add Soft Tail Flukes
The flukes are the two flat tail paddles that push water.

1. Cut two symmetrical flukes from foam, rubber, or plastic.
2. Shape them like a wide V or crescent.
3. Attach them to the end of the flexible tail.
4. Keep them soft enough to bend slightly in water.
5. Keep them wide enough to push water.
6. Make sure both sides are balanced.

A larger tail pushes more water but also creates more drag. Start small, then increase size if the swimmer barely moves.

Step 6: Seal All Openings
Waterproofing is the most important part.

1. Seal body seams with silicone, hot glue, or waterproof tape.
2. Seal the wire exit point near the servo.
3. Seal around the tail mount.
4. Keep the electronics inside a second waterproof barrier.
5. Let silicone fully cure before water testing.
6. Shake the body gently and listen for loose parts.

Use two layers of protection: an outer sealed shell and an inner sealed electronics pouch.

Step 7: Test Motor Movement Outside Water
Before water testing, confirm the servo works in air.

1. Turn the robot on while it is dry.
2. Watch the tail swing left and right.
3. Check that the servo does not stall or buzz loudly.
4. Check that wires do not pull loose.
5. Test slow, medium, and fast speeds.
6. Turn it off and inspect the tail joint.

The tail should move rhythmically:
center -> left -> center -> right -> center

Step 8: Program Tail-Beat Modes
Use simple servo angles.

Slow mode:
- Small angle
- Low frequency
- Gentle swimming

Medium mode:
- Medium angle
- Moderate frequency
- Normal swimming

Fast mode:
- Larger angle
- Faster frequency
- Burst swimming

Example Arduino-style logic:

#include <Servo.h>

Servo tail;

int centerAngle = 90;
int slowAmp = 15;
int mediumAmp = 25;
int fastAmp = 35;

void setup() {
  tail.attach(9);
}

void wagTail(int amplitude, int delayTime) {
  tail.write(centerAngle - amplitude);
  delay(delayTime);
  tail.write(centerAngle + amplitude);
  delay(delayTime);
}

void loop() {
  // Slow swimming
  for (int i = 0; i < 20; i++) {
    wagTail(slowAmp, 220);
  }

  // Medium swimming
  for (int i = 0; i < 30; i++) {
    wagTail(mediumAmp, 150);
  }

  // Fast burst
  for (int i = 0; i < 20; i++) {
    wagTail(fastAmp, 90);
  }
}

Step 9: Test Flotation in Shallow Water
Use shallow water first.

1. Place the dolphin in water while powered off.
2. Check whether it floats.
3. Check whether it stays upright.
4. Check whether the tail is partly submerged.
5. Check whether the nose points too far up or down.
6. Remove it and dry it immediately if water enters.

The ideal position:
- Body floats level.
- Tail sits in the water.
- Top of body remains above water or just below the surface.
- Electronics stay dry.

Step 10: Adjust Weight and Balance
Balance determines whether it swims forward or rolls over.

1. If the nose rises too much, add weight near the front.
2. If the nose sinks, move weight backward.
3. If it rolls sideways, add weight lower in the body.
4. If it sinks, add foam.
5. If the tail is too high, add slight weight near the rear.
6. If the tail is too low, add foam near the rear.

Make small changes and retest after each adjustment.

Step 11: Test Powered Swimming
After flotation works, test the motor in water.

1. Turn on slow mode first.
2. Place the dolphin in shallow water.
3. Watch whether the tail pushes water.
4. Observe whether it moves forward, spins, stalls, or rolls.
5. Stop the test after a short run.
6. Remove the dolphin and inspect for leaks.

Possible Results

Moves forward:
- Tail and balance are working.

Spins in circles:
- Tail is off-center or body is unevenly weighted.

Barely moves:
- Tail is too small, too soft, or servo motion is too weak.

Rolls over:
- Weight is too high or body is too round.

Sinks:
- Too much weight or not enough flotation.

Leaks:
- Dry immediately and reseal.

Step 12: Improve the Dolphin Shape
After the basic version swims, improve the dolphin-like body.

1. Add a rounded forehead.
2. Add a short rostrum/nose.
3. Add a dorsal fin on top.
4. Add two side pectoral fins.
5. Smooth the body with tape, foam, or plastic covering.
6. Paint the top gray-blue and the underside light gray.
7. Add a blowhole mark and eyes.

Do not add too many decorations until the swimming behavior works.

Simple Build Sequence

1. Build floating body.
2. Install battery and controller.
3. Attach servo.
4. Attach flexible tail.
5. Add soft flukes.
6. Seal the body.
7. Test tail motion dry.
8. Test flotation.
9. Adjust weight.
10. Test swimming.
11. Tune tail speed.
12. Add dolphin details.

Scientific Principle
The robotic dolphin moves by converting servo oscillation into water thrust. The tail sweeps side to side, pushing water backward and sideways. The reaction force pushes the body forward.

Basic movement model:
- Tail angle changes over time.
- Tail pushes water.
- Water resists tail motion.
- Reaction force moves body forward.
- Body drag slows motion.
- Balance controls whether motion is straight, tilted, or circular.

Suggested First Prototype

Body: small plastic bottle
Tail: flexible plastic strip
Flukes: craft foam
Motor: small waterproofed servo
Controller: Arduino Nano or Micro:bit
Battery: small battery pack
Sealant: silicone + waterproof tape
Test area: bathtub or shallow plastic tub

The first goal should be stable floating and visible tail-driven motion, not speed.
